Such Mean People!
The way people treat others are important; they affect how others feel, act, and think.
It has a great impact on oneself, and can shape one’s personality or characteristics. The book
Chlorine Sky by Mahogany L. Browne walks through the childhood life of the narrator, in
which the narrator is consistently being treated negatively by her friend Lay Li and her sister
Essa. Throughout this story, the hurtful words that are thrown towards the narrator takes
impact on her, and the effects are revealed. Lay Li and Essa treat the narrator horribly by
bringing down her self-esteem, and the narrator is affected by the hurtful words by being less
confident and worsening her abilities.

First of all, Lay Li and Essa treat the narrator horribly by bringing down her
self-esteem. Throughout the book, the two girls often insult the narrator by telling her she is
not good enough. One quality that they target is the narrator’s losses. For example, when the
narrator discusses the time when she wonders about her dad, “Essa say he ain’t never want
you”(L. Browne 60). This is extremely negative, and will likely have negative effects on the
narrator. The feeling of not being wanted is horrible, especially by a family member such as
her dad. This further proves that this message is targeted to bring down her self-esteem.
Another quality that the girls target is the narrator’s priority. The narrator loves to be
important, or at least be worthy. However, Lay Li says things that make the narrator feel like
she has no value. For example, “Lay Li see me & usually she would wave me over, tell
whatever girl on her right side to move over, ‘She’s my right hand’”(L. Browne 67). Despite
the fact that saying someone is one’s “right hand” means to trust someone to support oneself.
However, this also automatically places someone below one’s own priority. Therefore, this
also can make the narrator feel that she is never worthy enough to be better than Lay Li. The
way Essa makes her feel unworthy and how Lay Li makes her feel low prioritised can prove
how the two girls treat the narrator horribly by bringing down her self-esteem.
One way the narrator is affected by the hurtful words is being less confident.
Confidence is something that the narrator has always inhibited. For example, as mentioned on
page 16,
“Both hands grip the orange world ridges in black talk back to my fingertips. James, Bird,
Bryant, Catchings, Jordan, Leslie, Curry Hammon, Jackson, Iverson, Johnson. For every
letter of their name, I plant my feet aim & shoot. If I flick my left wrist perfectly, I’ll soar like
the greats.”

The people she looks up to, and how she sees herself soaring like them on the court
reveals her true inner confidence. However, the hurtful words she receives significantly
impacts this. Lay Li often does not take responsibility, and blames the narrator. This is shown
when she mentions the time she and Lay Li argued, “In my head I can still hear her when we
argued. ‘You ruined everything’, ‘You ruined everything’, ‘You ruined everything’”(L.
Browne 35). Being blamed all the time is never a good feeling, and causes her to be insecure
about herself/her capabilities. Therefore, this shows how the argument affects her negatively.
This also shows that it has a significant impact on her, as she said she “still” can hear the
words from the argument. Since arguments are often forgotten easily, this shows that these
particular words had huge impacts on her. The way Lay Li’s words have impacts on the
narrator’s mind, and stays in it proves that the hurtful words do bring down her confidence.
Another way the narrator is affected by the hurtful words is by worsening her
abilities. Before the bullying started, she was able to thrive in her talents with no limitations;
her skills in basketball were one of the best in the school. However, her doubtfulness
increases, and her skills diminish as Essa’s words hit her; “She lies so much it sounds like a
history lesson. miss. She lies so much she’ll make you believe rain is a colour coming out of
the sky. I shoot & when she lies like she do. I still think she makes rainbows. miss.”(L.
Browne 36). In this quote, every time the narrator states how Essa lies, she misses. This can
show that the lies Essa tells are bringing her down, and impacting her abilities. The negative
effects of the unkind words on her skills demonstrates how these words worsens her abilities.

Lay Li and Essa treat the narrator dreadfully by bringing down her self-esteem, and
the narrator is impacted by the back-stabbing words by having less confidence and her
deteriorating skills. Throughout the story, the narrator has demonstrated many aspects of
bravery, commitment, and determination. However, despite these skills, her friends still
manage to treat her in a way that dictates her performance. As Tim Sanders’ once said, “Your
network is your net worth”. This shows that no matter how good you are internally, your
external friends still have major control over your abilities.